There are some emotions that it
feels like our society has
reasonable scripts for dealing
with.
But in my experience,
grief has never really been
among them,
particularly for those of us
who don't believe in any
divinity or afterlife.
We come back to the same canned
platitudes,
like "I'm sorry for your loss",
because so much of what lies
outside of those safe rote lines
feels like it's in danger of
slipping off one side of a
knife edge.
On one hand, it seems
unspeakably cruel
to reinforce someone's sense of
despair,
to tell themselves that their
darkest voices about their
life are right.
But positivity and optimism
feel false, even insulting:
hope we have no right to give.
Sadness and anger at least have
their roots in the world
that still is.
Grief is the acute awareness of
an absence,
something or someone ripped
from the fabric of your life.
Grief can destabilize,
can feel like trying to learn
how to walk after an amputation.
With every step your muscle
memory tries to lean back into
the limb that isn't there,
and you wobble on, trying to
find some new balance.
You can't tell someone that an
absence will be filled again,
because it probably won't be,
not perfectly.
There will always be nooks and
crannies that stay empty,
even with our best efforts.
We can't say that it will
eventually get better,
because broken things don't
always get rebuilt
and things we lose sometimes
just stay lost.
A year and a half ago a good
friend of mine died suddenly.
I was far from the hardest hit
by their death,
but it did give me a painfully
close encounter with grief.
When I heard
it felt like the universe had
suddenly shuddered into an
unthinkable incoherent
trajectory.
Parts of my life that had
entwined themselves around them
were unquestioned solidity one
minute,
and completely gone the next.
This year I think many of us
have become acquainted with a
broader palette of grief and
loss
than we ever thought we would
have to experience.
Grief for human life is
horrible and wrenching and
intense and one of the worst
feelings we have to endure.
But on some basic level, it's
something I expected
I would have to face someday,
part of the biological contract
with mortality.
Growing up,
I never considered what it
would feel like to feel grief
for normality itself.
To an even greater extent than
the more
expected forms of grief,
it's something that feels hard
to talk about with the nuance
it deserves.
This is a grief we have even
less of a language for.
This year,
so many parts of my life, big
and small,
have turned into aching
absences.
I imagine the same is true for
many of you.
Late night conversations at
crowded parties,
leaning your head on a friend's
shoulder
without thinking about it.
The uncomplicated certainty of
knowing you'll see your family
at the holidays.
The tingling excitement of
stepping onto an airplane
going somewhere new,
without having to worry about
how tightly your mask is
fitting.
Social institutions you've
invested in and cared deeply
about
that simply can't translate to
the digital.
Communities that used to be
full of warmth and dynamism,
now
ghostly remnants trying to
subsist on the forms of
connection that remain.
When I look at my own life, it
can be hard to even account
for all of the things I've lost.
Since some days
it feels like my world
is filled up more by the empty
spaces left behind
than by the things I have
managed to cling on to.
And I know it's probably the
case
that we've not lost all of
these things permanently.
But we don't really know yet
what the world will look like
after this.
This
is loss,
and what I felt for all of
those little experiences of
normality was grief,
but it took me a while to
acknowledge that to myself.
It felt stupid
and insignificant and
unbelievably selfish
to put the loss I felt for
these small joys and wonders
even in the same category as
the loss of human life.
Who was I to claim to be
grieving?
I asked myself.
100 line:1
I hadn't even known anyone who
had died in the pandemic.
101 line:1
They were the only ones who had
the right to that emotion.
102 line:1
But there is not some
103 line:1
fixed pool of grief in the world
104 line:1
that my taking the emotional
frame
105 line:1
robs it from someone who needs
it more.
106 line:1
In my non-theological view of
things,
107 line:1
there are no spirits watching
108 line:1
to be offended by the
comparison.
109 line:1
There are just people,
110 line:1
trying to put their worlds back
together.
111 line:1
Grief is for the living.
112 line:1
And we can all mourn our
different forms of brokenness
113 line:1
together,
114 line:1
without that implying a claim
115 line:1
that our losses are equal in
magnitude.
116 line:1
Because telling ourselves that
what we lost
117 line:1
was trivial in some cosmic
objective sense
118 line:1
is unnecessary cruelty,
119 line:1
when we know it wasn't trivial
for us.
120 line:1
For me, the hardest part of
processing my grief for the
121 line:1
world as it was before this year
122 line:1
has been
123 line:1
convincing myself to remember
how things were
124 line:1
but to not be consumed by that
remembering.
125 line:1
It can be hard for me to choose
to conjure up
126 line:1
the bright colors of the past,
127 line:1
when I know that doing so will
make the pain of returning to
128 line:1
the muted, grey affordances of
today
129 line:1
even more stark.
130 line:1
It can feel easier to just
forget what community really
131 line:1
felt like.
132 line:1
What excitement felt like.
133 line:1
What optimism felt like.
134 line:1
Because the less I remember
them,
135 line:1
the less I'll have to feel the
weight of their absence,
136 line:1
the massive outlines in my life
where they used to be.
137 line:1
The less I'll be overwhelmed
into paralysis by the
138 line:1
magnitude of that loss.
139 line:1
It's really
140 line:1
really tempting to just shut it
all out.
141 line:1
But I worry that if I do shut
those memories out,
142 line:1
I'll curl myself up so small
143 line:1
to fit what's left of the world,
144 line:1
and become too used to only
inhabiting that smallness.
145 line:1
And that when the world opens
up again,
146 line:1
and there's room for good
things to grow,
147 line:1
I'll have lost the muscle memory
148 line:1
I would need
149 line:1
to inhabit the spaciousness of
that possibility,
150 line:1
to fill the newfound space with
ambitious and valuable and
151 line:1
lovely things.
152 line:1
To plant seeds in a garden
153 line:1
I may not get to see grow as
strong as it was before the
154 line:1
world broke.
155 line:1
And, at least for me,
156 line:1
I think rebuilding will mean
somehow keeping my memories of
157 line:1
the good things alive and
real-feeling long enough for
158 line:1
them to give me a blueprint
for the institutions and
159 line:1
connections and investments
160 line:1
I'll want to bring back into
the world someday.
161 line:1
Even though it hurts to go back
to grey
162 line:1
after remembering a world of
color.
163 line:1
If it feels right for you,
164 line:1
take 15 seconds now
165 line:1
to really remember
166 line:1
what some of the good things
that this year has taken away
167 line:1
felt like.
168 line:1
Ultimately,
169 line:1
our obligation is to the future.
170 line:1
Sometimes fulfilling that
obligation means
171 line:1
stoking a fire ever higher,
172 line:1
giving it fuel to light the
night.
173 line:1
But sometimes it means
174 line:1
finding a few embers amidst the
ashes,
175 line:1
and keeping them safe
176 line:1
until they can light a new
batch of kindling.
177 line:1
Even if the embers won't be
enough to really keep you warm.
178 line:1
And in the meantime,
179 line:1
all you'll have is the memory
of fire.